Good morning.
Welcome to session 303, Cocoa Scripting.
What I'm going to talk about today,
I'm going to start with the
basics of Cocoa Scripting,
for those of you who
haven't worked with it yet.
The scripting commands and
classes that are built into Cocoa,
so you don't have to do anything
to get that support for those.
How you would declare
new scripting classes,
and how to implement scripting classes.
I'll talk about,
go into specifics about the types you
use in declaring scripting suites.
will talk about the new features that
are appearing in the Jaguar seed,
and I'll share with you some of our
future plans for Cocoa scripting.
So the basics,
starting from the ground level.
AppleScript presents scriptability
as commands and classes that
are grouped into suites.
These are what appear in the
scripting dictionary window of an
application like Script Editor.
And what we care about here today
are the commands that applications
handle and the classes that
applications expose as scriptable.
Cocoa scripting does a
bunch of things for you.
It gives you a way to
declare commands and classes.
I'll show you how to do that.
It handles incoming Apple events,
converts them to command objects,
and executes those
command objects for you.
And it declares and implements most
of the standard suite and tech suite
commands and classes ahead of time.
You don't even have to
do anything for those.
So what you have to do to take
advantage of Cocoa scripting is,
well, for starters, very simply,
you have to include an
NSAppleScript enable entry
in your property list whose
value is not surprisingly yes.
And you have to include some files
in file format so we define in the
resources directory of your bundle
to declare the scripting support.
You have to add methods to your
application to handle any custom
classes you define for your scripting.
And you have to add methods,
accessor methods,
on the classes that you've
declared to be scriptable.
So the files in the apps
bundle that I'm talking about.
There are two file
formats that you support,
that we support,
and to implement scriptability
you have to provide both of these.
There's a script suite file
and a script terminology file.
These are actually property lists.
They're parallel property lists,
and by that I mean the dictionaries
in them have roughly the same
top-level entries in both cases.
The script suite file is for declaring
the scripting model of the scripting
and how it maps to the Objective-C,
or Java actually,
classes and methods that
are in your application.
The script terminology provides
all the human readable strings
that will appear in scripting
dictionaries that scripters see.
And if you're wondering,
if you already know the
history of AppleScript,
you know there's an AETE format
that has to be supported,
and we do that automatically.
We, uh... When a scripting...
When a scripting event first
comes into your application,
we parse the relevant script suite
and script terminology files and
merge them and return the AETE data.
Both ScriptSuite and
ScriptTerminology files,
at their top level,
they're pretty much dictionaries.
They both contain commands
and classes sub-dictionaries.
A ScriptSuite file also
contains an Apple event code.
In the open scripting architecture,
each suite has to be identified
by a unique four-character code.
I'll have more news about that later.
There's also a name.
The one in the ScriptSuite
is not human-readable.
It's a programmatic name that's
used to identify the ScriptSuite.
It appears in a few other places.
The ScriptTerminology file,
at its top level,
also has a description and
a name entry for the suite,
the human-readable ones.
There's other stuff I'll go into
later to support custom value types.
So, how do you declare commands?
Well,
you have to declare them in two places.
First of all, you have to declare them
in the script suite file.
You have to provide two
four-character codes for each command,
the AppleEvent class code
and the AppleEvent code.
And some of the documentation I'll
point you to at the end of the
talk will give you some advice
on how to make these things up.
You have to declare for
each command arguments,
and for each argument
another AppleEvent code,
and a type.
And I'll talk further about what
types are available for you to use.
And if the command returns a result,
a result AppleEvent code
and another type string.
And a unique entry in that command
dictionary is command class.
and Command Class is typically the
name of an Objective-C subclass
of NSScript command or
NSScript command itself.
This is important because
scripted operations,
after they've been sent to a
scriptable application via Apple event,
are converted to instances
of this command object,
whichever one you've specified.
It's very often useful to
subclass NSScript command,
but also very often it's not necessary.
NSScript command,
that class itself has everything
included with it to encapsulate
the arguments that were part of
the command and things like that.
You also have to declare commands
in the script terminology file.
This is where you present
all the user-visible,
human-readable strings,
both for the command,
you provide a description and a name,
and for each of the arguments,
you provide a description and a name.
So, for example, I'm not going to,
I'm going to spend more time
on classes than commands.
But if you want to see a quick example,
look in the foundation frameworks bundle.
There's two files there,
nscoresuite.scriptsuite and
nscoresuite.scriptterminology.
You'll see all of our
declared standard commands.
An easy example is the nsclose command,
which encapsulates everything associated
with an AppleScript close command.
As an example of something in
Cocoa that knows how to handle that,
our nsdocument class knows
how to handle that command.
is the founder of the
AppleScript standard suite.
The AppleScript standard suite has
for years now declared a reasonably
sized batch of standard commands,
open, print, quit, close, save, count,
delete, etc.
We provide support for
pretty much all of those,
not quite, but almost all of them.
Very often our support takes the form
of a subclass Venice script command that
encapsulates instances of those commands.
and something that's actually not part
of the AppleScript standard suite,
the get and set commands
are considered implicit.
Everybody has to support them,
so nobody bothers,
nobody has to declare them
in their scripting support,
but of course we still
have to handle them,
and we do that with the ns get
command and ns set command classes.
I'm going to be talking a lot more
about our standard command classes
because your scriptable classes,
when they're being queried for properties
or elements or something like that,
have to know how they'll be queried.
They'll be queried
using key value coding.
It's also what's used to set the
values of properties and elements.
A quick pointer,
you shouldn't have to declare
too many new commands yourself.
Text data, for instance,
does not have to declare
any new commands.
There are plenty of good
reasons to declare new commands,
but it's very often not necessary.
The documentation I'll point you to at
the end of the presentation describes
some of the thinking behind that.
So just as classes or as commands
are declared in ScriptSuite
and ScriptTerminology files,
so are classes.
And a quick rundown through the
entries that you use when declaring
them in the ScriptSuite file.
The superclass, which is a string.
An Apple event code.
You have to provide that still.
Attributes.
We call them attributes in
our ScriptSuite file format,
but they correspond to
AppleScript properties.
To many relationships,
which correspond to elements.
And a few other things.
Apple event code.
Read only and type for each attribute
and to many relationship of the class.
Any supported commands if
the class handles commands
that are sent to it itself.
And at the bottom of the slide,
there's two on relationships.
If you're digging around in our
ScriptSuite and ScriptTerminology files,
you'll see that in a few places.
You probably won't have
to use it yourself,
though,
so I won't go into it too much today.
But you should be able to do everything
you need to do just about with
attributes and too many relationships.
When you declare a class
in the script suite,
you have to pick a name for it.
That name is the key in the
class's dictionary for that entry.
That class name should just about always
be an Objective-C or Java class name,
for example, NSWindow.
As part of the class declaration,
you always have to
provide a superclass also.
You can use the name of another
class in that same script suite,
or you can use the name of a
class in another script suite,
for example, our NSCore suite,
which is part of Foundation.
When you do that,
you have to specify that using the little
dot in the middle like you see there.
Just as with commands, classes,
you have to provide information
in the script terminology file.
So the human readable description
and name and plural name,
which is usually appropriate
in scripting dictionaries,
and for each attribute,
a description and name.
So, for example,
to show you some of these files,
I've decided to add something that should
probably have already been in TextEdit,
scriptability of the
page setup of a document,
what appears in the page setup
dialog and those parameters.
So, on the Demo 1 machine,
let's quickly just look at
some of those declarations.
So this is a text edit
scripting dictionary.
It's pretty much unchanged from what's on
the Jaguar seed CD that you have there,
except I've added this to document,
a page setup attribute,
which is of class page setup object.
Very often you want to use a different
name there to avoid some ugly naming
conflicts that cause AppleScript to be
a little bit harder to write for people.
So I decided to call the
class page setup object.
It's something that other people do, too.
The declaration of that
class is down here.
and it has the things you would expect
to be associated with page setup,
the paper width and the
name and the margins and the
orientation and the scaling.
That's how it appears to the scripter.
Here's what you would
have to write to do that.
and I've highlighted
the new things in color.
There's a couple different
ways to edit a property list.
You can use Property List Editor or
another program that'll point you
to at the end of the presentation.
Or you could just edit them as ASCII.
I usually don't edit them as ASCII,
but for demonstration purposes,
it's a little bit easier to
show it to you like this.
And I actually made an RTF file
out of the ScriptSuite file so
I could add some color to it.
So this is the declaration of
that page setup attribute in
the document class that we just
saw in the scripting dictionary.
I picked an Apple event code for it,
and I said it was read-only.
You can change the things
within a document's page setup,
but you can't take a page setup
and slap it onto another document
the way I have it set up here.
Page Setup class is declared as
nscourseSuite.abstractObject.
AbstractObject is a class declared
in foundations nscourseSuite.
When you're not subclassing
from something else,
that's the superclass you should use.
I've declared a bunch of
attributes on the page setup class,
providing a four-character code
for each one and whether or
not it's read-only and a type.
I'll discuss these types
in more detail later on,
but for now,
they should look pretty familiar for you.
NSString is the Objective-C class name.
NSNumberFloat.
An NSNumber will be moving around
in the code that I'll show you,
but we let you specify a
more specific subtype of it.
Something more informative can
show in the scripting dictionary.
Another type that I'll
discuss is enumerations.
and enumeration for the orientation
of the page setup and its possible
values are landscape and portrait.
So the things in the script
terminology file that correspond
to those declarations in the
script suite file are here.
For that page setup attribute that
we've added to the document class,
you have to provide a
description and a name,
and these strings right here
are what eventually appear here.
Page Setup Class Description
and Name Description and
Name for each of the attributes
For that enumeration
that we'll discuss later,
same thing, description and name.
Go back to the slides.
Before we get much more into classes
and the implementation of classes,
like that one that I just showed
you the declaration for right there,
it's useful for you to know what
classes are already built into Cocoa.
The standard suite declares
classes like Application,
Document, and Window,
and we provide scriptable
support for all of those using,
not surprisingly, NSApplication,
NSDocument, and NSWindow.
All of the text suite stuff
is declared and is implemented
by our NS Text Storage class.
A little word of advice for when you're
working with this stuff yourself.
Subclassing just to add scripting
properties and elements is very
often unnecessary with Objective-C.
You can use categories instead.
You might have good reasons to
create a subclass of NS Window,
for instance,
but if you're just adding scripting
properties and you're adding
accessor methods for those,
you really don't need to
subclass it just for that.
You can just add category methods.
One more thing before I show you how
to implement these scriptable classes.
A few of the details about what
happens during command execution.
An NSScript command encapsulates pretty
much everything from the Apple event
that came into our application.
The direct parameter
from the Apple event,
in most cases,
becomes what we call an object specifier
for the receivers of the command.
The other parameters in the event become
arguments in our NSScript command object.
Some of those might also
be object specifiers,
some of which might just be plain value
objects like NSStrings and NSNumbers.
When I say object specifier,
I mean an instance of NSScript object
specifier or one of its subclasses.
So, for example,
the AppleScript reference,
word for of text of front document.
It actually becomes a
chain of object specifiers,
NSIndexSpecifier that encapsulates
the concept of word for which points
to a parent contain and its property
specifier which encapsulates the
concept of the text property of
something and then its parent
container specifier is NSIndexSpecifier
that encapsulates document one.
And anything that doesn't have a parent
container specifier is assumed that
that's a top level object and that the
application is the container of that.
and we have full support for all the
reference forms you can read about
in the AppleScript language guide.
Index references become index specifiers,
property references become
NS property specifiers,
and so on.
Object specifiers are evaluated
during command execution.
And what I mean by that is that the exact
set of specified objects is determined,
usually ends up in an
NSArray in most cases.
And those are the actual objects,
in the case of the receiver
specifier for a command,
that are going to receive the command.
So those are actual Objective-C objects.
During that evaluation
of object specifiers,
containers are asked for attribute
values and relationship objects.
In that example I just showed you,
during the evaluation of that
chain of object specifiers,
the application would be
asked for the first document,
and it would be asked
for its text object,
and so on.
So, in general, during command execution,
that evaluation of the receiver's
object specifier is the first step.
If there are any argument
object specifiers,
they're also evaluated.
If a command has been, or I'm sorry,
if a scripting class has been declared
to support commands of a specific type,
usually using a supported commands
declaration in the script suite file,
a message will be sent to each of those
receivers that which message is part
of the declaration for the supported
commands in the script suite file.
More likely,
a script command can override NS script
command perform default implementation,
and it'll take care of managing the
execution of the command itself.
This is the typical case for
most of the commands that are
built right into Foundation,
for get and set and make and
move and things like that.
Your objects aren't sent to command
and then asked to just deal with it.
We do all the work of picking it
apart and calling accessor methods
in your objects and things like that.
The way we call these accessor
methods is we use key value coding.
Your scriptable classes have
to conform to key value coding.
What is key value coding?
It's the system that lets us invoke
methods in your class without
knowing their names ahead of time.
This is how we can convert attribute or
relationship names into method names.
What this means for you is that
you get to write your scripting
support in a very natural fashion,
writing methods that don't
have to switch on Apple event
codes or something like that.
You get to just write methods
and we'll find them and
call them at the right time.
and there's a couple places in
scripting that uses key value coding.
When objects are
Thank you.
So, and there's a couple places
where we use key value coding.
During the evaluation
of object specifiers,
when objects are being found,
it's used to query the container objects.
And during the execution of get
and set and things like that,
that's what we use to poke
at your scriptable objects.
So, and it's a great demonstration of
the dynamic binding and the runtime
introspection features of Objective-C.
So I've been talking
about accessor methods.
What do they look like?
Well, first of all,
what we send your object is a
message that looks like this,
value for key attribute name,
where the attribute name is the string
that was used to declare that attribute
on that class in the script suite file.
Now, you could override this method.
This is a method on NSObject,
but that's not as
convenient as it could be.
What you can do instead is
provide a method that's simply
just named attribute name.
And key value coding will
find that and invoke that,
and you return, very simply,
the object that is the
value for that attribute.
And what type should it be?
It should correspond to the type
that was used to declare that
attribute in the script suite file.
A similar thing happens during,
for instance, set commands.
Just as key value coding
has a value for key method,
it also has a take value for key method.
And the method that you
implement that corresponds to
that is called setAttributeName,
where attribute name there should
be replaced by the actual name that
was used in the script suite file.
So, one thing,
AppleScript doesn't do too much
type checking in a lot of places,
and right now neither do we.
So,
you should use isKindOfClass or something
like that in Objective-C to make sure
that that object you're being passed is
the right type and react accordingly.
So, example.
To go back to demo one,
let's look at the code to implement that
stuff that we were talking about before.
So here's the TextEdit project.
I've added a single method to document
and a new class called Page Setup.
So this is the accessor for that
page setup attribute on document.
It corresponds...
is a great example of this.
This attribute name corresponds
to this method name.
And this will be called
automatically at all the right times.
What TextEdit's Document class
is doing in this case is
it's creating a new object,
a new temporary object,
of the PageSetup class,
giving it a pointer to itself,
and then auto-releasing it.
Objective-C's,
or our reference counting system,
makes this kind of
thing pretty convenient.
You may be wondering why we have
a separate PageSetup class instead
of just giving direct access to the
print info or something like that.
There's a little bit of a
complication in this example.
TextEdit needs to know when the
print info has been changed.
And print infos don't notify
anybody when they've been changed.
So we've added this one
level of indirection,
which isn't a great complication,
but you do have to know about it.
And it's something-- It's a very handy
thing to do in quite a few places,
actually.
So the page setup class itself,
its public declaration is very simple,
just init with document.
Objective C,
you don't have to declare every method
that it implements over and over again,
both in the header and
in the source code file.
This is public because TextEdit's
document class uses this.
The actual methods in
the page setup class,
in it with document,
all this does is initialize itself
using the typical Cocoa pattern.
Make that a little bigger.
Initializes itself using
the typical Cocoa pattern.
And then all the other methods on this,
and that's about how
many of them there are,
correspond to those attributes that
we declared in the script suite file.
So there was a paper name method,
or I'm sorry,
there was a paper name attribute
in that script suite file.
So here we have set paper name,
this is the setting accessor,
and the get accessor, paper name.
And this is it.
This is about as simple as it gets.
The implementation of these
particular ones asks the document
for the print info object.
It's an instance of the
NSPrintInfo class from AppKit.
And set the value.
And then tell the document that the print
info has been updated so that it can
update the screen and things like that.
So real quick, just to show this kind
of stuff in action.
[Transcript missing]
So, wrap to page,
because that better illustrates
the page orientation.
So this is it.
Set orientation of page
setup to landscape.
Typically simple AppleScript.
And it does that.
So, no, no, no.
Let's see that in slow motion, though,
because some interesting
things are happening,
and they can be seen with the debugger.
So I have a couple
breakpoints set here already.
That page setup accessor
on the document class,
and because we're filling
the orientation right there,
the set orientation accessor method
that I'll explain when we hit it.
So run that.
Stopped at breakpoint.
Good.
[Transcript missing]
And what happens during the handling
of one of those Apple events
after it's been converted to
an instance of NSScript command,
the NSScript command is executed.
And the first step of executing a
command like this one is evaluating
the receivers for the command.
An NSScript object specifier
takes care of that.
Objects by evaluating specifier,
by evaluating itself, really.
And then this is the
neat part right here.
NSScript object specifier, at this point,
it's actually already
found the document object.
Now it wants to find the page setup
attribute of the document object.
What it does is it sends the document
object a value for key message.
We didn't bother overriding
that in document.
We just let NSObject's implementation
of that method handle it.
And NSObject value for key
calls document page setup.
This stuff in between here and all
the rest of it should just be called
a miracle occurs because an attribute
name became a method name without us
having to do very much of anything.
I'll continue there.
We'll hit this other breakpoint
on our page set of classes,
set orientation method.
Stacktrace is interesting for this one,
too.
AppleScript has lost patience with us.
That's okay.
We're executing the command.
We're not evaluating the
receivers at this point.
And at this point,
NSSetCommand has determined that
the receivers for the command
don't handle it themselves.
Because in the Text-as-Document class,
there was no supported commands
declaration for set commands,
not surprisingly.
So what it did is it's doing
its own default implementation.
Its default implementation,
this is NSSet command,
calls take value for key.
Value in this case is an
NSNumber that contains that
four-character code enumeration,
and the key is orientation.
And the key actually was
declared as orientation,
all lowercase, in the script suite file.
That's okay.
We're smart enough to capitalize for you.
So another miracle occurs,
and page setup orientation is invoked.
One of the interesting things
that key value coding did for us,
by the way, here,
is even though the type for this
attribute was to be declared
a certain kind of NSNumber,
and NSNumbers really were
flying about internally.
That's what was passed to that
take value for key invocation.
Key value coding is smart enough
to use Objective-C's introspection
features to find out that this
method is declared to take,
in this case, an enum declared like this,
and actually becomes an integer.
So it actually pulled the integer
out of the NSNumber for us,
and passed that instead.
So saving us a line of code there.
And NS print info is not so smart.
It doesn't understand
AppleScript four-character codes,
and definitely never will.
So we had to write a little bit of code
here to take that four-character code,
and to make it into one of the
CE nums that print info understands.
So, and just,
I'm going to go back to the slide.
Just to show you something
else while I'm up here.
- So the margins here, I think,
are about an inch on each side.
That's the default.
Here's another script.
Set margins to one half inch.
We had declared attributes
like left margin,
top margin, right margin,
along with all the paper size
and scaling and things like
that on our page setup class.
And that, of course, works.
I want you to take note
of this right here.
Set properties of page setup.
There's actually a
property called properties.
Its value, either going in or coming out,
is a record of potential properties.
That isn't something
that's part of text edit,
and it's not something
that we just added.
That's automatic,
and I'll explain that later.
So to go back to the slides.
So, just as there's key value
coding for attributes,
there's key value coding
for too many relationships.
It's one more level of complication,
not really complication,
but something you have to deal with
because you're dealing with groups
of objects instead of single objects.
We use the same method, value for key,
in a lot of cases for relationships also.
Cocoa scripting, we'll call that on your
scriptable classes when you've
declared too many relationships.
In this case, though,
if it's a relationship,
you should return an array of
objects instead of a single object.
If that sounds inefficient to you,
if you don't already have an
array hanging around to return,
know that in more and more cases,
this is evolving right now as we speak,
we try to call methods like
ValuateIndex and PropertyKey
relationship name messages.
and what you implement there
is a method named value and
relationship name and index,
and you just return a single object.
You don't have to make up an array
if you don't already have one around.
And that's potentially, of course,
much more efficient than when we ask
your container class for an array
of objects that might not already
be nicely bundled into an array.
and something we added pretty recently,
in addition to Value-It Index,
which has been there for a while,
there's now Value-With-Name
and Property-With-Key and
Value-With-Unique-ID and
Property-With-Key.
These correspond to the
AppleScript name and ID reference forms.
And what you do to support those
is implement methods whose names
take that form right there.
Value and RelationshipNameWithName.
Again,
RelationshipName is the name that was
used for the relationship when you
declared it in the script suite file.
And those return a single object.
And these aren't used for
every kind of element,
only elements whose class
declare name and ID properties.
Name or ID properties.
And there are three more possible
messages for key value coding that
relate to too many relationships.
We call things like replace value in
index and property with key with value.
And your container class has to implement
a method whose name takes the form
replace in relationship name at index.
And those are used during, for example,
the copy command,
or the duplicate command, rather,
the delete command, the make command,
things like that.
So in addition to supporting
those key value coding methods,
which is pretty easy,
one more thing that you should be
aware of that you might have to do,
if you support classes in your
scripting system that are creatable,
for example, in TextEdit,
make new document,
you do have to make sure that
that class has a good init method.
And that's just the plain init method.
There are no parameters passed into that.
What we do, though,
because the make command has a with
properties parameter that is optional,
we'll call the set accessors for all
the attributes on that freshly created
object that correspond to those that
were in the record that appeared
with the with properties parameter.
So.
and it's not really possible
to make an object that just
hangs in the middle of nowhere.
You always have to specify
what container it's going to
be inserted into immediately.
So make sure the valid container
classes for that class that might be
credible implement the proper replace
in and insert in accessor methods.
And one more thing to deal with.
This is the big complexity, actually,
relatively speaking.
Your scriptable object may be
sent an object specifier message.
Just as object specifiers come in,
very often they go out.
The result of a make command
is a reference in AppleScript,
which means we have to
return an object specifier.
So your newly created object might
be asked pretty much immediately
for its object specifier.
And another case like that
is in the get command.
When the reference that goes with
the get command refers to something
that is not a simple value type,
is an actual object,
the object that your accessor
has returned will be asked
for an object specifier.
And what you're expected to do
there is to create some subclass
of an script object specifier,
index specifier, name specifier,
unique ID specifier,
becoming the typical ones,
and return that.
A big implementation detail about
this is that you'll probably have
to ask the container of the object,
of the element object,
for its object specifier,
which is actually kind of inconvenient
in a lot of people's code,
and we are doing something to
address that that I'll discuss later.
So I showed you a little bit
about script suite files,
and I've been talking about types,
but I haven't gotten specific
about what exactly you can use
as types in script suite files.
You have to specify type names
when declaring class attributes,
class relationships, command arguments,
and command results.
The valid types include things like
the names of scriptable classes,
a few selected foundation classes,
and a little more complicated
thing that I'll talk about.
Scriptable class names.
You can use as type names classes that
were declared in the same script suite
in which that declaration appears,
and also classes that were
declared in other script suites
if you specify which script suite.
You should know that we declare
a few classes in Foundation's own
NSCoreSuite script suite file,
including things like NSApplication
and NSDocument and NSWindow that
are actually implemented in AppKit,
but nonetheless declared in
Foundation's NSCoreSuite.script suite.
That's where to go to look for that.
Some value types that we support:
NSString,
which will always appear in scripting
dictionaries as Unicode text.
NSDate, which corresponds to date,
of course.
NSHorray.
If you've been working with
Cocoa scripting already and you
tried to declare the type of a
property to be a list in NSHorray,
it didn't work at all.
It was a big bug.
It was a whopper.
And we took care of that, though,
so that will work in the
Jaguar seed that you have.
NSDictionary's.
That's what you use to declare
something that you want to appear
as a record in a scripting suite.
And references and location references.
We have classes that correspond to those.
You saw some of the NSNumber types
that were in the script
suite file there before.
We support a big long list of those.
These get moved around as NSNumbers,
but appear as specific
friendly AppleScript types
in the scripting dictionary.
and the one little complication as
far as types go is for enumerations.
When you specify that an
enumeration is the type of a value,
you have to also declare elsewhere in
the ScriptSuite and script terminology
files information about that enumeration.
The four character codes that correspond
to each enumerator ask yes and no,
for instance,
and you have to provide descriptions
and names for each of those,
too.
So, let's talk about the new stuff
that's appearing in Jaguar.
I already alluded to this.
We have a new class
called NSNameSpecifier.
It supports AppleScript's
name reference form,
so something like window
named Cocoa Scripting.
is an example of this.
We used to ask for the application for
all of its windows and poke through
each one of them asking for its name.
That's not so bad in the case of windows,
but it's potentially very awful
in the case of other things.
The first example anybody ever asked
me for was a stock ticker application
of some sort where they wanted to refer
to stock information by the symbol.
Of course,
there are thousands of those possible.
They had a way to look it up
quickly using a dictionary,
and now that quickness can flow through
to the Cocoa scripting system this way.
So by implementing a method named
value in relationship name with name,
when a name reference form comes in,
we'll send you that,
and you can make it as fast as you
can to return the named object.
To trigger this,
the element class has to have
an attribute that's going to
be called the element class.
The element class is a code
whose Apple event code is PNAM,
the traditional
four-character code for that.
And the same thing for
the ID reference form.
We now have a class named
NSUniqueIDSpecifier.
It's triggered when you have a
four character code ID space space.
There are two spaces in that
four character code there.
And there's a method
that corresponds to that,
value and relationship
name with unique ID.
So one thing I showed you with that
page setup example was setting all
those margins at one time by setting
the properties of that page setup
object to a record that included values
for each of the four margins there.
And that is now just built
into Cocoa Scripting.
We have all the information necessary
to support this because you put
it all in the script suite file.
So you don't have to do
anything beyond that.
Each one of your classes will
have a properties property in it.
Actually, it's in our item class,
which you will be a subclass of if you
refer to nscoresuite.abstractobject
in your script suite file.
And just as for any other attribute,
there are accessor methods for these.
We've made ours public for
this in a category on nsobject
with the predictable names.
I'm not expecting you to probably
ever have to override those,
but they're there just in case.
A neat little feature we added recently.
Lots of other scriptable
applications were doing this,
so we thought we'd make
it easy for you to do it,
too.
In an application like TextEdit,
for instance,
people used to have to write fourth
word of text to front document.
Well, when they say fourth word,
what else would it be in a
TextEdit document but the text?
So we now let you add support for
that little bit of ease of use,
and you do that with a single entry
in the script suite file called
default subcontainer attribute.
NSAppleEventDescriptor,
a class that's been in Cocoa for a while.
We've added a few methods on it.
NSAppleEventDescriptor appears
in our API in a few places,
and it's going to be appearing in a
few others potentially in the future.
So we've started making it a little bit
easier to pick these things apart with
methods like bool value and string value
when you know the AppleEventDescriptor
contains one of those,
or contains, for instance,
something that is
coercible to one of those.
And to create them,
we added a few convenient
class methods too.
I know people want this class
because I've been reading the
mailing list and it's becoming sort
of a frequently asked question.
How do I execute AppleScripts
from within Cocoa?
And there are actually a couple of freely
available classes that do this now,
but built into the system very
often is one step better than free,
so we've done that.
You no longer have to resort to the
Carbon APIs to execute AppleScripts.
And it has the things
that you would expect.
You can initialize an NSAppleScript that
corresponds to the contents of a file,
including a compiled file.
And despite the name of the class,
any OSA language is good.
You can initialize from source code.
You can compile and execute,
and we give you ways to get at
all the error information that
might be returned during that.
And one neat feature,
NSAppleScript is actually
a class in Foundation,
but there's a category on it in
the AppKit with a single method,
rich text source.
When you invoke this on a script
that's compiled successfully,
it will do pretty much the same
thing that Script Editor does
and pretty print the source code,
except it returns an NS attributed
string to you that you can just slam
into an NSTextView or something like
that without any trouble and show good
looking AppleScript code to your users.
So all this, of course,
is described in the release notes,
deep within the turgid prose
of those pages and pages
of scripting release notes.
Absolutely every new feature in
BugFix is described in great,
grueling detail.
This is on your CD right now,
one of your six CDs right now,
at developer documentation release notes,
foundation.html.
Most of scripting is in foundation.
So, future directions.
If you were at the
AppleScript update session yesterday,
you saw the introduction of the new
SDEF file format for defining suites.
And, of course,
we're going to adopt this eventually.
Editing script suite and script
terminology files is all well and good,
but editing SDEF files looks like
it's going to be one step easier
and will allow us to add a few
other features when we adopt that.
That's not going to happen for
the final release of Jaguar,
though, almost certainly.
So, even before then,
even with our existing script suite
and script terminology file formats,
we're going to make those a little
bit better so that the scripting
dictionaries that the scripter
sees will be a little prettier.
Right now,
you don't have control over the
order in which things appear in
those scripting dictionaries,
which is a little bit of an omission,
and we're going to take care of that.
And also,
there's going to be a mechanism that will
be reminiscent of Objective-C categories.
So that you can add attributes
onto scriptable classes that are
declared in other suites without
making a redundant subclass appear
in the scripting dictionary.
We're going to work on our type checking.
We already do a bunch,
but we can do a lot more.
Our goal is to eventually fix it
so that you specify in good detail
the scripting definition file,
what types an attribute can have,
or relationship.
And then we'll take care of absolutely
everything for making sure that things
that are coming in conform to those types
without you having to do anything at all.
And a closely related subject,
we're working on our error reporting.
If you've been working with
scripting a Cocoa application,
you might have seen it return some
truly horrifying error messages
that no scripter could ever
parse or make head or tail of.
And we're working on replacing those
with something more informative.
So other things we still plan on adding.
Cocoa API for sending Apple events.
Right now you can call just about
any Carbon function from a Cocoa app,
but it seems like a lot
of people don't like to.
People want that kind of
functionality wrapped up in an
Objective-C or Java class and
made a little more convenient,
a little more pretty,
and of course we want to do that too,
so we will.
There are a couple of complicated
implementation details that you might
run into as far as how your scripting
support interacts with your undo support.
Some things that you have to take
care of that might surprise you
when you start working with it.
And we have ways in mind
actually to automate all of that.
So scriptable commands will
automatically be undoable without
you doing much of anything,
probably adding a single
method to container classes.
I talked before about the inconvenience
of what goes on when you implement
an object specifier method,
when an object is asked to
return one of these for itself.
That does cause a good bit of trouble,
and we're probably going to change that.
Of course, we'll keep supporting the old
way for backward compatibility.
But we're going to start asking objects'
containers for object specifiers
instead of the objects themselves.
This way,
objects won't have to be cognizant of
their containers just for this sake.
There are plenty of places in
coding where that is appropriate,
but to have to add it just for
the sake of this one method
is a great inconvenience.
And the last thing, of course,
definitely not the least,
is recordability.
You're not a perfect scriptable
application in a lot of cases
until you support recordability.
And right now, we don't do anything
to help you with this.
And, of course, we do intend to.
So the roadmap, the AppleScript update
yesterday was fantastic.
I hope you all saw it.
AppleScript studio talks are always good.
There's a feedback forum,
and that was yesterday too.
There's a feedback forum for AppleScript.
That's where you can go to let them know
what you think about how excited you are
about AppleScript 10 that's coming up
and general scripting issues like that.
Cocoa's own feedback forum
is tomorrow at 5 o'clock.
So, who to contact?
Heather Hickman is our
technology manager.
If you've been on the Cocoa track,
you've been seeing our email address
flash up and down a couple of times.
Documentation.
There is plenty of documentation
for Cocoa scripting.
It's spread out a little bit, though.
In particular, in the Cocoa topics,
there's two very relevant topics.
First one is application architecture.
It explains the model
view controller pattern.
Even if you're not working
on scriptability for your
application right away,
you should read this documentation
before you start writing,
because if you follow a lot
of the patterns it discusses,
when you do add scriptability,
it'll be a good bit easier, probably.
The really specific Cocoa Scripting
documentation is in its own topic,
also available from
the typical web pages.
So it gives you a pretty good
overview of the programming
tasks that have to be dealt with,
and it links to the class
reference and things like that.
I wanted to bring this one
to everybody's attention.
Designing a scripting implementation.
A seven-year-old article that appeared
in Develop Issue 21 by Cal Simone.
I keep referring back to this.
This is a fantastic article.
A lot of the implementation
details are pretty irrelevant
for Cocoa scripting now,
but it's really easy to pick those out.
What's important about this article
is he presents guidelines for what
makes a good scriptable application.
How do you decide when
something should be a command,
when should it be a property,
when should it be an element,
things like that.
It's still a very valuable document.
And he also gives you there some advice
about picking four-character codes.
and for more information,
the usual suspects,
Cocoa developer documentation,
iServices technical training.
On the O'Reilly webpage,
somebody's writing some very
interesting articles about
AppleScript in general on MacOSX,
and some of them are specifically
about Cocoa scripting.
and before I go, I want to bring this
application to your attention.
It's called Suite Modeler.
It's by a guy named Don Briggs.
It's available on his iDisk.
It's a shareware application that
lets you edit script suite and
script terminology files together.
It makes a lot of things
much more convenient,
and it does a good job of checking
for things like Apple event code
conflicts and other mistakes.
He's actually used it to find
a few bugs in our own script
suite and script terminology
files that appear on the system.
And he sent those to me,
and we've taken care of that, of course.
And, of course, on his iDisk,
he has a very interesting tutorial
that goes along with that,
too.
So, that's it.
Go make your applications scriptable,
but before you do that,
I'm sure you'll have a few questions,
so I'd like to invite Heather Hickman
and others up to the stage to
walk us through some of it.